---
title: "Grammatical Framework for the working Mathematician"
excerpt: "An introduction to Grammatical Framework for a mathematically inclined audience"
tags:
  - gf
  - syntax highlighting
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
---

# Introduction

For this inaugural blog-post, I will introduce Grammatical Framework (GF) through an extended example targeted at a general audience familiar with logic, functional programming, or mathematics. GF is a powerful tool for specifying grammars. A grammar specification in GF is actually an abstract syntax. With an abstract syntax specified, one can then define various linearization rules which compositionally evaluate to strings. An Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) may then be linearized to various strings admitted by different concrete syntaxes.  Conversely, given a string admitted by the language being defined, GF's powerful parser will generate all the ASTs which linearize to that tree.

## Focus of this tutorial

We introduce this subject assuming no familiarity with GF, but a general mathematical and programming maturity. While GF is certainly geared to applications in domain specific machine translation, this writing will hopefully make evident that learning about GF, even without the intention of using it for its intended application, is a useful exercise in abstractly understanding syntax and its importance in just about any domain.

A working high-level introduction of Grammatical Framework emphasizing both theoretical and practical elements of GF, as well as their interplay. Specific things covered will be

* Historical developments leading to the creation and discovery of the GF formalism
* The difference between Abstract and Concrete Syntax, and the linearization and parsing functions between these two categories
* The basic judgments :
  * Abstract : `cat, fun`
  * Concrete : `lincat, lin`
  * Auxiliary : `oper, param`
* A library for building natural language applications with GF
    * The Resource Grammar Library (RGL)
    * A way of interfacing GF with Haskell and transforming ASTs externally
    * The Portable Grammar Format (PGF)
* Module System and directory structure
* A brief comparison with other tools like BNFC

These topics will be understood via a simple example of an expression language, `Arith`, which will serve as a case study for understanding the many robust, theoretical topics mentioned above - indeed, mathematics is best understood and learned through examples. Possible exercises will be interspersed throughout, but per usual, the best exercises are the reader's own ideas, questions, and contentions which may arise while reading through this.

# Theoretical Overview

## What is a GF grammar ?

Consider a language L, for now given a single linear presentation C^L_0, where AST_L String_L0 denote the sets GF ASTs and Strings in the languages generated by the rules of L's abstract syntax and L0s compositional representation.

  Parse : String -> {AST} Linearize : AST -> String

with the important property that given a string s,

  forall x in (Parse s), Linearize x == s

And given an AST a, we can Parse . Linearize a belongs to {AST}

Now we should explore why the linearizations are interesting. In part, this is because they have arisen from the role of grammars have played in the intersection and interaction between computer science and linguistics at least since Chomsky in the 50s, and they have different understandings and utilities in the respective disciplines. These two discplines converge in GF, which allows us to talk about natural languages (NLs) from programming languages (PLs) perspective. GF captures languages more expressive than Chomsky's Context Free Grammars (CFGs) but is still decideable with parsing in (cubic?) polynomial time, which means it still is quite domain specific and leaves a lot to be desired as far as turing complete languages or those capable of general recursion are concerned.

We can should note that computa

  given a string s , perhaps a phrase map Linearize (Parse s)

is understood as the set of translations of a phrase of one language to possibly grammatical phrases in the other languages connected by a mutual abstract syntax. So we could denote these L^English, L^Bantu, L^Swedish for L^Englsih_American vs L^Englsih_English or L^Bantu_i with i being any one of the Bantu languages a hypothetical set of linguists and grammar writers may want to implement, on a given fragment of abstract syntax, with various domain applications, as determined by L, in mind.

  One could also further elaborate these L^English_0 L^English_1 to varying degrees of granularity, like L^English_Chomsky L^English_Partee because Chomsky may something like "I was stoked" and Partee may only say something analogous "I was really excited" or whatever the individual nuances come with how speakers say what they mean with different surface syntax, and also

  L_0 < L_1 -> L_English_0 < L_English_1

But this would be similair to a set of expressions translateable between programming languages, like Logic^English, Logic^Latex, Logic^Agda, Logic^Coq, etc

where one could extend the

Logic_Core^English Logic_Extended^English

whereas in the PL domain

Logic_Core^Agda Logic_Extended^Agda may collapse at certain points, but also in some ways extend beyond our Languages capacities (we can make machine code only machines can understand, not us)

or Mathematics = Logic + domain specific Mathematics^English Mathematics^Agda

where we could have further refinements, via, for instance, the module system, the concrete and linear designs like

Mathematics^English iI -- Something about

  The Functor (in the module sense familiar to ML programmers)

  break down to different classifications of

-- Something about

  The Functor (in the module sense familiar to ML programmers)

  break down to different classifications of

  The indexes here, while seemingly arbitrary,

  One could also further elaborate these L^English_0 L^English_1 to varying degrees of granularity, like L^English_Chomsky L^English_Partee

  because Chomsky may something like "I was stoked" and Partee may only say something analogous "I was really excited" or whatever the individual nuances come with how speakers say what they mean with different surface syntax, and also

Given a set of categories,  we define the functions \phi : (c_1, ..., c_n) -> c_t over the categories which will serve as the constructors of our ASTs. The categories and functions are denoted in GF with the cat and fun judgment.

## Some preliminary observations and considerations

There are many ways to skin a cat. While in some sense GF offers the user a limited palette with which to paint, she nonetheless has quite a bit of flexibility in her decision making when designing a GF grammar for a specific domain or application. These decisions are not binary, but rest in the spectrum of of considerations varying between :

* immediate usability and long term sustainability
* prototyping and production readiness
* dependency on external resources liable to change
* research or application oriented
* sensitivity and vulnerability to errors
* scalability and maintainability

Many answers to where on the spectrum a Grammar lies will only become clear a posteriori to code being written, which often contradicts prior decisions which had been made and requires significant efforts to refactor. General best practices that apply to all programming languages, like effective use of modularity, can and should be applied by the GF programmer out of the box, whereas the strong type system also promotes a degree of rigidity with which the programmer is forced to stay in a certain safety boundary. Nonetheless, a grammar is in some sense a really large program, which brings a whole series of difficulties.

When designing a GF grammar for a given application, the most immediate question that will come to mind is separation of concerns as regards the spectrum of

[Abstract <-> Concrete] sytnax

Have your cake and eat it ?

# A grammar for basic arithmetic

## Judgments

A central contribution of Per Martin-Löf in the development of type theory was the recognition of the centrality of judgments in logic. Many mathematicians aren't familiar with the spectrum of judgments available, and merely believe they are concerned with *the* notion of truth, namely *the truth* of a mathematical proposition or theorem. There are many judgments one can make which most mathematicians aren't aware of or at least never mention.  These include, for instance,

* $$A$$ is a proposition
* $$A$$ is possible
* $$A$$ is probable

These judgments are understood not in the object language in which we state our propositions, possibilities, or probabilities, but as assertions in the metalanguage which require evidence for us to know and believe them. Most mathematicians may reach for their wallets if I come in and give a talk saying it is possible that the Riemann Hypothesis is true, partially because they already know that, and partially because it doesn't seem particularly interesting to say that something is possible, in the same way that a physicist may flinch if you say alchemy is possible. Most mathematicians, however, would agree that $$P = NP$$ is possible but isn't probable.

For the logician these judgments may well be interesting because their may be logics in which the discussion of possibility or probability is even more interesting than the discussion of truth. And for the type theorist, interested in designing and building programming languages over many various logics, these judgments become a prime focus. The role of the type-checker in a programming language is to present evidence for, or decide the validity of the judgments. The four main judgments of type theory are :

* $$T$$ is a type
* $$T$$ and $$T'$$ are equal types
* $$t$$ is a term of type $$T$$
* $$t$$ and $$t'$$ are equal terms of type $$T$$

We succinctly present these in a mathematical notation where Frege's turnstile, $$\vdash$$, denotes a judgment :

$$\vdash T \; {\rm type}$$

$$\vdash T = T'$$

$$\vdash t {:} T$$

$$\vdash t = t' {:} T$$

These judgments become much more interesting when we add the ability for them to be interpreted in a some context with judgment hypotheses. Given a series of judgments $$J_1,...,J_n$$, denoted $$\Gamma$$, where $$J_i$$ can depend on previously listed $$J's$$, we can make judgment $$J$$ under the hypotheses, e.g. $$J_1,...,J_n \vdash J$$. Often these hypotheses $$J_i$$, alternatively called *antecedents*, denote variables which may occur freely in the *consequent* judgment $$J$$. For instance, the antecedent, $$x {:} \R$$ occurs freely in the syntactic expression $$\sin x$$, a which is given meaning in the judgment $$\vdash \sin x {:} \R$$. We write our hypothetical judgement as follows :

$$x {:} \R \vdash \sin x {:} \R$$

One reason why hypothetical judgments are so interesting is we can devise rules which allow us to translate from the metalanguage to the object language using lambda expressions. These play the role of a function in mathematics and implication in logic. This comes out in the following introduction rule :

$$
\frac{\Gamma, x {:} A \vdash b {:} B}
{\Gamma \vdash \lambda x. b {:}  A \rightarrow B}
$$

Using this rule, we now see a typical judgment, typical in a field like from real analysis,

$$\vdash \lambda x. \sin x {:} \R \rightarrow \R$$

Equality :

Mathematicians denote this judgement

$$
\begin{align}
  f {:} \R &\rightarrow \R\\
  x &\mapsto \sin ( x )
\end{align}
$$

### Abstract Judgments

The core syntax of GF is quite simple. The abstract syntax specification, denoted mathematically above as _, and in GF as `Arith.gf` is given by :


```haskell
abstract Arith = {
...
}
```

**Note :** All GF files end with the `.gf` file extension. More detailed information about abstract, concrete, modules, etc. relevant for GF is specified internal to a `*.gf` file
{: .notice--info}

The abstract specification is simple, and reveals GF's power and elegance. The two primary abstract judgments are :

1. `cat` : denoting a syntactic category
2. `fun` : denoting a n-ary function over categories. This is essentially a labeled context-free rewrite rule with (non-)terminal string information suppressed

**Additional Judgments:** While there are more advanced abstract judgments, for instance `def` allows one to incorporate semantic information, discussion of these will be deferred to other resources.
{: .notice--info}

These judgments have different interpretations in the natural and formal language settings. Let's see the spine of the `Arith` language, where we merely want to be able to write expressions like `( 3 + 4 ) * 5` in a myriad of concrete syntaxes. 

```haskell
cat Exp ; 

fun
  Add  : Exp -> Exp -> Exp ;
  Mul  : Exp -> Exp -> Exp ;
  EInt : Int -> Exp ;
```

To represent this abstractly, we merely have two binary operators, labeled `Add` and `Mul`, whose intended interpretation is just the operator names, and the `EInt` function which coerces a predefined `Int`, natively supported numerical strings `"0","1","2",...` into arithmetic expressions. We can now generate our first abstract syntax tree, corresponding to the above expression, `Mul (Add (EInt 3) (EInt 4)) (EInt 5)`, more readable perhaps with the tree structure expanded : 

```haskell
Mul 
  Add 
    EInt 3
    EInt 4 
  EInt 5
```

The trees nodes are just the function names, and the leaves, while denoted above as numbers, are actually function names for the built-in numeric strings which happen to be linearized to the same piece of syntax, i.e. `linearize 3 == 3`, where the left-hand 3 has type `Int` and the right-hand 3 has type `Str`. 

**Builtin Categories :** GF has support for very few, but important categories. These are `Int`, `Float`, and `String`.  It is my contention and that adding user defined builtin categories would greatly ease the burden of work for people interested in using GF to model programming languages, because `String` makes the grammars notoriously ambiguous.
{: .notice--info}

In computer science terms, to judge `Foo` to be a given category `cat Foo;` corresponds to the definition of a given Algebraic Datatypes (ADTs) in Haskell, or inductive definitions in Agda, whereas the function judgments `fun` correspond to the various constructors. These connections become explicit in the PGF embedding of GF into Haskell, but examining the Haskell code below makes one suspect their is some equivalence lurking in the corner: 

```haskell
data Exp = Add Exp Exp | Mul Exp Exp | EInt Int
```

In linguistics we can interpret the judgments via alternatively simple and standard examples:

1. `cat` : these could be syntactic categories like Common Nouns `CN`, Noun Phrases `NP` , and determiners `Det`
2. `fun` : give us ways of combining words or phrases into more complex syntactic units

For instance, if 

```haskell
fun 
  carCN  : CN ;
  theDet : Det ;
  DetCN   : Det -> CN -> NP ;
```

Then one can form a tree `DetCN theDet carCN` which should linearize to `"the car"` in English, `bilen` in Swedish, and `imoto` in Zulu once we have implemented concrete syntax linearizations for these respective languages, which we will now do.

While there was an equivalence suggested Haskell ADTs should be careful not to treat these as the same as the GF judgments. Indeed, the linguistic interpretation breaks this analogy, because linguistic categories aren't stable mathematical objects in the sense that they evolved and changed during the evolution of language, and will continue to do so. Since GF is primarily concerned with parsing and linearization of languages, the full power of inductive definitions in Agda, for instance, doesn't seem like a particularly natural space to study and model natural language phenomena.


#### Arith.gf

Below we recapitulate, for completeness, the whole `Arith.gf` file with all the pieces from above glued together, which, the reader should start to play with. 

```haskell
abstract Arith = {

flags startcat = Exp ;

-- a judgement which says "Exp is a category"
cat
  Exp ;

fun
  Add  : Exp -> Exp -> Exp ; -- "+"
  Mul  : Exp -> Exp -> Exp ; -- "*"
  EInt : Int -> Exp ; -- "33"

}
```

The astute reader will recognize some code which has not yet been described.  The comments, delegated with `--`, can have their own lines or be given at the end of a piece of code. It is good practice to give example linearizations as comments in the abstract syntax file, so that it can be read in a stand-alone way. 

The `flags startcat = Exp ;` line is not a judgment, but piece of metadata for the compiler so that it knows, when generating random ASTs, to include a function at the root of the AST with codomain `Exp`. If I hadn't included `flags startcat = *some cat*` , and ran `gr` in the gf shell, we would get the following error, which can be incredibly confusing but simple bug to fix if you know what to look for!

```haskell
Category S is not in scope
CallStack (from HasCallStack):
  error, called at src/compiler/GF/Command/Commands.hs:881:38 in gf-3.10.4-BNI84g7Cbh1LvYlghrRUOG:GF.Command.Commands
```

### Concrete Judgments

We now append our abstract syntax GF file `Arith.gf` with our first concrete GF syntax, some pigdin English way of saying our same expression above, namely `the product of the sum of 3 and 4 and 5`. Note that `Mul` and `Add` both being binary operators preclude this reading : `product of (the sum of 3 and 4 and 5)` in GF, despite the fact that it seems the more natural English interpretation and it doesn't admit a proper semantic reading.

Reflecting the tree around the `Mul` root, `Mul (EInt 5) (Add (EInt 3) (EInt 4))`, we get a reading where the 'natural interpretation' matches the actual syntax :`the product of 5 and the sum of 3 and 4`. Let's look at the concrete syntax which allow us to simply specify the linearization rules corresponding to the above `fun` function judgements. 

Our concrete syntax header says that `ArithEng1` is constrained by the fact that the concrete syntaxes must share the same prefix with the abstract syntax, and extend it with one or more characters, i.e. `Arith+.gf`.

```haskell
concrete ArithEng1 of Arith = {
...
}
```

We now introduce the two concrete syntax judgments which compliment those above, namely :

* `cat` is dual to `lincat`
* `fun` is dual to `lin`

Here is the first pass at an English linearization :

```haskell
lincat
  Exp = Str ;

lin
  Add e1 e2 = "the sum of" ++ e1 ++ "and" ++ e2 ;
  Mul e1 e2 = "the product of" ++ e1 ++ "and" ++ e2 ;
  EInt i = i.s ;
```

The `lincat` judgement says that `Exp` category is given a linearization type `Str`, which means that any expression is just evaluated to a string. There are more expressive linearization types, records and tables, or products and coproducts in the mathematician's lingo. For instance, `EInt i = i.s` that we project the s field from the integer i (records are indexed by numbers but rather by names in PLs). We defer a more extended discussion of linearization types for later examples where they are not just useful but necessary, producing grammars more expressive than CFGs called Parallel Multiple Context Free Grammars (PMCFGs).

The linearization of the `Add` function takes two arguements, `e1` and `e2` which must necessarily evaluate to strings, and produces a string. Strings in GF are denoted with double quotes `"my string"` and concatenation with `++`. This resulting string, `"the sum of" ++ e1 ++ "and" ++ e2` is the concatenation of `"the sum of"`, the evaluated string `e1`, `"and"`, and the string of a linearized `e2`.  The linearization of `EInt` is almost an identity function, except that the primitive Integer's are strings embedded in a record for scalability purposes. 

Given a `fun` judgement 

  $$f {:} C_0 \rightarrow C_1 \rightarrow ... \rightarrow C_n$$

in the `abstract` file, the GF user provides a corresping `lin` judgement of the form

  $$f \: c_0 \: c_1 \: ... \: c_n \: {=} \: t_0 \: \texttt{++} \: t_1 \: \texttt{++} \: ... \: \texttt{++} \: t_m $$

in the `concrete` file. Each $$c_i$$ must have the linearization type given in the `lincat` of $$C_i$$ , e.g. if `lincat C_i = T ;` then `c_i : T`. 

We step through the example above to see how the linearization recursively evaluates, noting that this may not be the actual reduction order GF internally performs :

```haskell
linearize (Mul (Add (EInt 3) (EInt 4)) (EInt 5))
->* "the product of" ++ linearize (Add (EInt 3) (EInt 4)) ++ "and" ++ linearize (EInt 5)
->* "the product of" ++ ("the sum of" ++ (EInt 3) ++ (EInt 4)) ++ "and" ++ ({ s = "5"} . s)
->* "the product of" ++ ("the sum of" ++ ({ s = "3"} . s) ++ ({ s = "4"} . s)) ++ "and" ++ "5"
->* "the product of" ++ ("the sum of" ++ "3" ++ "and" ++ "4") ++ "and" ++ "5"
->* "the product of" ++ ("the sum of" ++ "3" ++ "and" ++ "4") ++ "and" ++ "5"
->* "product of the sum of 3 and 4 and 5"
```



The most important properties of the functions


#### Extending `Arith.gf` with Variables and Propositions

Now that we have our expressions, let's suppose we want to extend 

# Appendix : Historical Developments

Prehistory :

CFGs, Chomsky Hierarchy, BNF

Natural Language Semantics & Martin Lof Type Theory :
